
[Back](../Index.md)

## 2023-10-02

### Financial Intermediaries

They reduce the exposure of risk through risk-sharing: they create loans that have far more risks than deposits

Transforming high risk  assets into low risk assets.

Deposits hold a liquidity risk for banks.

This process is called **asset transformation**.

**Diversification** by providing loans in different sectors.

---

Types of banks

- Depository institutions (banks)
  - Commercial Banks
  - Savings and loan associations
  - Mutual saving banks
  - Credit unions
- Contractual saving institutions
  - Life insurance
  - Non life insurance
  - Pension funds public/private

---

Investment banks profit on commissions on performances and profits.
Advise firms, banks, people and institutions accessing and managing financial markets.

---

### Functions of the Banks

1. Offering liquidity and payment services
2. Transforming assets
  
- Convenience of denomination
- Quality transformation
- Maturity transformation

3. Managing Risk

- Credit Risk
- Interest rate and liquidity risk
- Processing and monitoring borrows

---

Interest rate risk (due to difference in maturity).

Cost of funds may rise above the contractual interest rates of the loans provided by the banks.

---

Liquidity risk  
Unexpected withdrawals, bank runs.

---

Credit risk - asymmetry of information (ex ante, adverse selection) (ex post, moral hazard)

---

Off Balance Sheet Operations
Portfolio management, consultancy
Swaps, hedging contracts, and securities.








