
[Back](../Index.md)

## 2023-10-04

[Arrow-Debreu Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrow%E2%80%93Debreu_model)

**Explicit Utility functions** are the ones in which the full utility is specified.

In the case of $maxU(C_1,C_2)$ its implicit.

---

$$\begin{cases} 
maxU(C_1,C_2)\\
s.t.
\begin{cases}
C_1+D_h+B_h = \omega_h \\
\rho C_2 = \Pi_f + \Pi_b + (1 + r)B_h + (1+ r_D)D_h
\end{cases}
\end{cases}$$

To solve this issue we have to build up a lagrangian

$L = U(C_1,C_2)-\lambda[(C_1+D_h+B_h-\omega_1)+\rho C_2 -\Pi_f - \Pi_b - (1+r_0)D_h-(1+r)B_h]$

To find the maximum of a function:

- First order condition
  - First derivative must be > 0
- Second order condition
  - Second derivative must be < 0


$\frac{\sigma L}{\sigma C_1} \rightarrow \frac{\sigma u'}{\sigma C_1} - \lambda[1] = 0$

$\frac{\sigma L}{\sigma C_2} \rightarrow \frac{\sigma u'}{\sigma C_2} - \lambda \rho = 0$

$\frac{\sigma L}{\sigma D_n} = -\lambda [1- (1+r_D)] = 0$

$\frac{\sigma L}{\sigma B_h} = -\lambda [1- (1+r)] = 0$


First conclusion:

In equilibrium marginal utility of consumption at time 1 must be equal to marginal utility of consumption at time 2

Stable level of utility through time.

Second conclusion:

>$\frac{\sigma L}{\sigma D_n} = -\lambda [1- (1+r_D)] = 0$  
>$\frac{\sigma L}{\sigma B_h} = -\lambda [1- (1+r)] = 0$

To satisfy this system $\rightarrow r = r_D$

---

Firms want to maximize profits and they choose how to finance their investments. Do they ask for loans or do they issue bonds?

Firms choose investment level $I$, bank loans $L$ and bonds $(L_f, B_f)$ such that they maximize profits

>$pf$ is profit 

$$\begin{cases} 
max \Pi_f\\
s.t.
\begin{cases}
\Pi_f = pf(I) - (1+r)B_f - (1+r_L)L_f \\
I = B_f + L_f
\end{cases}
\end{cases}$$

$I = B_f+L_f$ tells us that firms only finance investments recurring to the loan or bond market, without using past profits.

$L = pf(I) - (1-r)B_f - (1+r)L_f$

---

The professor is against the "extra profits" tax.

Banks choose supply $L_b$ and its financing $(D_b, B_b)$

$$\begin{cases} 
max \Pi_b\\
s.t.
\begin{cases}
\Pi_b = r_L L_b - rB_b - r_D D_b \\
L_b = B_d + D_b
\end{cases}
\end{cases}$$

---

General equilibrium:
>all markets at the same time are at equilibrium   

- prices (interest rates) $(r,r_L,r_D)$
- demand and supply
  - consumer $(C_1,C_2,B_h,D_h)$
  - firm $(I, B_f, L_f)$
  - bank $(L_b, B_b, D_b)$

- $I = S$ Goods market 
- $D_b = D_h$ deposit market  
- $L_f = L_b$ loan market
- $B_h = B_f + B_b$ bond market

If all agents behave optimally (they maximize their objective function, profits or utility) and each market clears (equilibrium between supply and demand)

The size and composition of balance sheet have no impact on other economic agents.

Banks make zero profits.

$r=r_D=r_L$

Main conclusion: in this model banks do not exist because there is perfect information and financial markets are complete.

The equilibrium in financial markets can be analyzed by studying banks.

As an example in microeconomics where often markets are assumed to be complete, there is no need for banks to be introduced considered.

---

Two motivations for banks:

1. Financial markets *cannot* be complete.
2. Banks offer services which are characterized by economies of scale and economies of scope.

>Economies of scale: average costs decrease with scale.  
>Economies of scope: efficiencies formed by variety.















