
[Back](../Index.md)

## 2023-10-04

[Arrow-Debreu Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrow%E2%80%93Debreu_model)

**Explicit Utility functions** are the ones in which the full utility is specified.

In the case of $maxU(C_1,C_2)$ its implicit.

---
## Consumers

The consumer chooses her consumption profile $(C_1; C_2)$, and the allocation of their
savings $S$ between bank deposits $D_h$ and securities (bonds) $B_h$, in a way that maximizes their utility function $u$ under their budget constraint:

>$\omega_h$ wealth owned by households = consumption now (time 1) $C_1$ + Deposits $D_h$ + Deposits $B_h$  
> $pC_2$ = price * consumption (time 2) = cost of future consumption (time 2) 

$$\begin{cases} 
maxU(C_1,C_2)\\
s.t.
\begin{cases}
C_1+D_h+B_h = \omega_h \\
p C_2 = \Pi_f + \Pi_b + (1 + r)B_h + (1+ r_D)D_h
\end{cases}
\end{cases}$$



To solve this issue we have to build up a lagrangian

>In mathematical optimization, the method of [*Lagrange multipliers*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrange_multiplier) is a strategy for finding the local maxima and minima of a function subject to equation constraints

>Lagrange multiplier Equation with 1 constraint  
>$L(x,y,λ) = f(x,y) - λg(x, y)$  
>
>Where $g(x,y) = 0$ ($g$ is just $f$ but equal to $0$, so all factors are brought to one sign and changed of sign:  
>$x+y = z$ becomes $(x+y-z)$

>Lagrange multiplier Equation with 2+ constraints  
>$L(x,y,\lambda_1, \lambda_2, ..., \lambda_n) = f(x,y) -  λ_1g_1(x, y) - λ_2g_2(x, y) - ... - λ_ng_n(x, y)$

>In this case however, the implicit value of $u(C_1,C_2)$ counts as one maximization constraint

$$L(u(C1,C2), λ) =\\
u(C_1,C_2)-\\
\lambda[(C_1+D_h +B_h- w_h)+
(p C_2 - \Pi_f - \Pi_b - (1 + r)B_h - (1+ r_D)D_h)]
$$

Now to asses local maxima and minima we can take the first *partial* derivative of each parameter, in this way we can get to know for each parameter, what satisfies the constraint:  
max $(C_1,C_2)$

Partial derivative of $C_1$, *consumption in time 1*

$\frac{\partial L}{\partial C_1} = \frac{\partial u'}{\partial C_1} - \lambda*1 = 0$

> Since $u(C_1,C_2)$ is not known, $\frac{\partial u'}{\partial C_1}$ cannot be expressed and has to remain implicit; that's just a way to say "the partial derivative of that"

Partial derivative of $C_2$, *consumption in time 2*

$\frac{\partial L}{\partial C_2} = \frac{\partial u'}{\partial C_2} - \lambda*p = 0$

Since to maximize our constraint we put both partial derivatives equal to $0$  
$\frac{\partial L}{\partial C_1}$ =  $\frac{\partial L}{\partial C_2}$ = 0

>We can say that in equilibrium, marginal utility (given by the derivates) of consumption at time 1 must be equal to marginal utility of consumption at time 2.

Furthermore:

Partial derivative of $D_h$, Debts held by households

$\frac{\partial L}{\partial D_n} = -\lambda [1- (1+r_D)] = 0$

Partial derivative of $B_h$, Bonds held by households

$\frac{\partial L}{\partial B_h} = -\lambda [1- (1+r)] = 0$

We can easily see from this system that:

$$\begin{cases}
\frac{\partial L}{\partial D_n} = -\lambda [1- (1+r_D)] = 0 \\
\frac{\partial L}{\partial B_h} = -\lambda [1- (1+r)] = 0 \\
\end{cases}
-\lambda [1- (1+r_D)] = -\lambda [1- (1+r)]$$

Hence

$r_D = r $

Interest rate of Deposits = Interest Rate  
If $r$ wasn't equal to $r_D$ investors would buy only bonds!

---

## Firms

Firms want to maximize profits and they choose how to finance their investments. Do they ask for loans or do they issue bonds?

Firms choose investment level $I$, bank loans $L$ and bonds $(L_f, B_f)$ such that they maximize profits.

>$f$ is the production function of firms 

$$\begin{cases} 
max \Pi_f\\
s.t.
\begin{cases}
\Pi_f = p*f(I) - (1+r)B_f - (1+r_L)L_f \\
I = B_f + L_f
\end{cases}
\end{cases}$$

$I = B_f+L_f$ tells us that firms only finance investments recurring to the loan or bond market, without using past profits.

$$L(\Pi_f, λ) =\\
\Pi_f \\
- \lambda [(\Pi_f-p*f(I)+(1+r)B_f+(1+r_L)L_f) + (I - B_f - L_f)]
$$

Partial derivative of $I$, investment

λ(p*Πf - 1)

$\frac{\partial L}{\partial I} = p * \frac{\partial f(I)}{\partial I} - \lambda = 0$

Marginal revenue = Marginal cost $\rightarrow$ Zero Profits

---

## General equilibrium
>all markets at the same time are at equilibrium  

- prices (interest rates) $(r,r_L,r_D)$
- demand and supply
  - consumer $(C_1,C_2,B_h,D_h)$
  - firm $(I, B_f, L_f)$
  - bank $(L_b, B_b, D_b)$

- $I = S$ Goods market 
- $D_b = D_h$ deposit market  
- $L_f = L_b$ loan market
- $B_h = B_f + B_b$ bond market

If all agents behave optimally (they maximize their objective function, profits or utility) and each market clears (equilibrium between supply and demand)

The size and composition of balance sheet have no impact on other economic agents.

Banks make zero profits.

$r=r_D=r_L$

Main conclusion: in this model banks do not exist because there is perfect information and financial markets are complete.

The equilibrium in financial markets can be analyzed by studying banks.

As an example in microeconomics where often markets are assumed to be complete, there is no need for banks to be introduced considered.

---

Two main reasons for the existence banks:

1. Financial markets *cannot* be complete.
2. Banks offer services which are characterized by economies of scale and economies of scope.

>Economies of scale: average costs decrease with scale.  
>Economies of scope: efficiencies formed by variety.


