
[Back](../Index.md)

## 2023-10-05

:cricket::cricket::cricket:

Why do banks exist?

>- Liquidity
>- Asset transformation
  >- Transaction costs
>- Managing risk
  >- Capable of reducing the risk of single investors' financial activities
>- Monitoring and information processing  

>Banks are assumed to be more efficient in performing these tasks than other financial institutions

Banks are capable to issue liquidity against liquidity shocks.

---

Asymmetries of information in the banking industry are of at least 2 types:

- Consumers can't trust the banks
- The banks can't trust consumers

Bank collect information in order to mitigate the asymmetry.

Some investments are indivisible. Meaning that if they are not fully completed they yield zero return. 

Banks, with huge diversified portfolios can afford the risk to invest in indivisible investments.

Another type of economies of scale is related to liquidity insurance a la Diamond and Dybvig.

By law of large numbers, the banks will have always liquidity for depositors who need it while investing in illiquid assets.

Reserve system, reserve ratio.

---

In a capital market with adverse selection, financial intermediaries can do better than individual borrowers by decreasing the risk of the investments through diversification.

Each has initial wealth $\omega_0$ and is endowed with a risky project of size normalized to 1


- Gross return of the project
  - $\widetilde{R}
(\theta ) = 1 + \widetilde{r}
(\theta ) \sim N(0, \sigma^2)$

- $u(e) \equiv -e^{-pw}$
  - Investors are risk averse 


- $\theta$ differs across projects

---

If $\theta$ were observable, each
entrepreneur would sell its project to the market at a price:

$P(\theta) = E[\widetilde{r}(\theta)] = \theta$

If $\theta$ is privately observed by the entrepreneur (adverse selection):

$E[u(W_0 + \widetilde{r}(\theta))] = u(W_0 + \theta \frac{1}{2}\rho \sigma^2)$

whereas by selling it to the market, he obtains $u(W_0+P)$. 

Therefore, entrepreneur $\theta$
will go to the financial market if and only if






Leland and Pyle (1977): **good entrepreneurs** can signal the quality of their projects by investing their own wealth into their project.

---

Let $N$ identical *good* entrepreneurs form a partnership, financing N their N projects with indipendently distributed returns.

Variance per project is now $\frac{\sigma^2}{2}$

Only a colation of borrowers can diversify, its not possible to do it through the markets; good entrepreneurs have an incentive to show their ...
