[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-09

### Assessment Test

- Derivatives
- Variance
- Present Value
- Role of the central bank, what does it control directly?
  - Reserve Ratio
  - Discount rate to banks -> (Monetary Supply)
- Balance Sheet - Where does each item belong? Asset, Liability, Cost Revenue
- Bank Risk and how to measure it
- Bank Types
- Economies of Scale and Economies of Scope
- Efficient Market Hypothesis
  - Financial markets are efficient and  asset prices fully reflect all available information
- Public deficit
  - the amount by which spending exceeds revenue
- Public debt
  - financial liabilities of the government
- Discount rate
  - the factor that you have to multiply in order to get a bond present value OR
  - the rate of interest that a country's central bank charges for lending money to other banks
- Money and Narrow Money
  - Narrow money, often referred to as M1, represents the most liquid forms of money within an economy. It includes the most readily accessible assets that can be quickly used for transactions.

---

Ex ante, interim, ex post monitoring.

Low cost of delegation: the costs of monitoring the monitor (FIs) has to be low

>Why/how banks allocate in an efficient way <- has been explained!

---



**The basic justification of banks put forward by Diamond (1984)**

$n$ Identical risk-neutral firms seek to finance projects

- Initial investment normalized to 1
  - Returns are identically and independently distributed
  - Cash flow $\widetilde{y}$ of the investment is unobservable to lenders
  - $\widetilde{y} = 0$ is possible

>Incomplete  
>When both parties don't have information about something  
>**Every project has some uncertainty**

(Small) Investors
- Each investors owns $\frac{1}{m}$, $m$ investors are needed to finance 1 project. 

Monitoring
- Lenders are able to observe by paying K

---

Direct lending with monitoring (no monitoring coordination):

- Each investor monitors the firms he as financed $\rightarrow$ cost is $mK$ for each investor  
One project has $m$ investors, $K$ cost

Total monitoring costs for all firms: $mnK$

---

In the case of a bank, it can monitor all firms $nK + C_n$, where $C_n$ is the cost of auditing the bank.  
Since $K < C$:

Delegated monitoring will be more efficient than direct lending if and only if  
$nK + C_n < nmK$

Hence the cost of direct monitoring from the bank is lower than the total monitoring cost of single investors.  

The only case that the depositors have to monitor the bank is the one in which the bank fails.

The bank doesn't have an interest to fail (commit moral hazard).

---
