[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-10

### Why direct and indirect lending coexist?

- Direct debt is less expensive than bank loans
  - Only firms that cannot issue debts select bank loans
  - Bank loan decrease the informational asymmetry, but increases the costs
- Explanation of the coexistence of the two types of finance
  - Moral hazard prevents firms without enough assets from obtaining direct finance

>On bonds interests are lower than loans  

Why don't all firms recur to the market?

>Bank loans decrease asymmetry of information  
>Bank loans increase the cost of lending relative to bonds  

---

Firms need to finance investment projects

- Project's size is normalized to 1
- Two available technologies

||Success|Failure|Probability of Success|
|---|---|---|---|
|Good Project|$G$|$0$|$\pi_G$|
|Good Project|$B$|$0$|$\pi_B$|

Only the good project provides profits, the bad project provides negative profits.

- $B > G$
- $\pi_G G > 1 > \pi_B B$
- Risk-free interest is simplified to 0

---

### Moral Hazard Problem

Once the firm received the loan, since the bank is not capable of monitoring the project, the firm can potentially choose the bad project instead of the good one.

The success of the investment is verifiable but Not the firm's choice of technology nor the return

- the non observability of the return will be required for risk shifting

Financial contract specifying:

- A fixed payment $R$ in case of success, $0$ in case of failure

Thus the firm can promise to repay some fixed amount $R$ ONLY in case of success.

In absence of monitoring, the firm will choose the "good" project/technology.

---

$\pi_G(G-R) \geq \pi_B(B_R)$

Since $\pi_G \geq \pi_B$

$R \leq R_C = \frac{\pi_gG - \pi_BB}{\pi_g - \pi_B}$

>$R_C$ is the critical value of nominal debt above which the firm chooses the
bad technology

Break even condition for investors: $\pi(R) * R  = 1$ if there is no discounting of the future where $\pi(R)$ 


$$
\pi(R) =
\begin{cases}
\pi_G \text{ , if } R \leq R_C \\
\pi_B \text{ , if } R \geq R_C
\end{cases}

$$

Put simply, if $R \leq R_C$ the firm will choose the good technology but  
in the case of $R \geq R_C$ the value of repayment is too high no-one will take a loan

- Equilibrium where $R \leq R_C$

$\pi_G R = 1 \leftrightarrow R = \frac{1}{\pi_G} \leq R_C$

---

Equilibrium without monitoring:

By monitoring banks can prevent firms from using the bad technology

- Monitoring is costly: the monitoring cost is C
- Banks loans increase cost, but decrease the asymmetry of information

Payments to banks $R_m$ must satisfy:  
$\pi_GR_m \geq 1 + C$
>The expected revenue of good project must be greater than 1 + cost of monitoring.

> $\frac{1+C}{\pi_G} \geq \frac{1}{\pi_G}$  
> The repayment with monitoring must be higher than the payment without monitoring.

---

Bank lending is possible at equilibrium if




Proposition: Assume that the monitoring cost $C$ is small enough so that $\frac{1}{R_C} \geq \frac{1+G}{G}$, three possible regimes for equilibrium:

- $\text{if}$ $\pi_G \geq \frac{1}{\pi_G}$, firms issue direct debt at a rate $R=\frac{1}{\pi_G}$
- $\text{if}$ $\pi_G \in [\frac{1+C}{G}, \frac{1}{R_C}]$, firms borrow from banks at a rate $R_m=\frac{1+C}{\pi_G}$
- $\text{if}$ $\frac{1}{R_C} \geq \frac{1+C}{G} \leftrightarrow \frac{\pi_gG - \pi_BB}{\pi_g - \pi_B} \geq \frac{1+C}{G}$ is true if $C$ is small enough

---

1. For projects witha  high probability of success and low monitoring costs, firm recur to direct lending by the market.
2. For projects with intermediate probability of success firms borrow from banks
3. If the probability of success of the project is low, credit market collapses

---

## Bank's Balance Sheet

Financial Ratios and bank performance measures

References:  
[Howells], Ch. 3 Bank of England 2010

---

Bank's balance sheet is the most important source to analyze banking behavior and performance.

- Competitiveness and volatility of the market
- Stability of the financial systems and markets
- Adequacy of the financial systems 
- Level of market discipline
  - Can also include for example collusion
- Sufficiency of the safety net
  - Can be capital or liquid assets

---

Italian Banks hold a lot of Govt. Securities, increasing systemic risk.

Growth in the balance sheet impacts the risk management process.  
Total Assets = Total Liabilities + Capital

