
[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-11

Loans are considered illiquid assets.  
In general, the higher liquidity, the less return.

The quality of a bank's portfolio depends on its economic environment, in terms of risk/return.

During a market crash, the bank:

- Reduces liabilities: mostly bonds
- Doesn't invest more in the stock
- Tries to attract more deposit at the same interest rate
- Expands lending: but demand for loans is also reduced.

Sight deposits are uncertain but free  
Time deposits are certain but costly

There is a guiding principle to understand bank's performance: the case in which the banks issue bonds, it doesn't have enough cash

The proportion between bonds and deposits is a good measure of degree of attractiveness of a bank.

(Bond Ratio)

---

Loan Growth is related with Economic Growth.

Deposit Growth gives a investors a sense of how much lending a bank can do.

Are you able to attract depositors with or without rising interest rates?

Quick growth $\rightarrow$ bank is taking too much risk

Slow growth $\rightarrow$ bank is not taking enough risk or is not performing

---

burden = (non interest expenses - non interest income) 

BANK NET INCOME = interest expenses - provision for loan losses - burden - taxes

---

Download the balance sheet from any bank.

Examine it and read it aloud.
Get some thoughts.

For next week on Monday.

Silicon Valley Bank  
Credit Suisse

---

Loan/Deposit Ratios $\rightarrow$ lower, higher bank liquidity; higher loans, aggressive bank, more profits, more vulnerable to shocks

Cost/Income Ratio (Efficiency Ratio)
costs include interest rates but also operating costs; lower is better





