
[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-24

What affects banking behavior?  


### The Industrial Organization Approach to Banking

Rochet Ch. 3, Heffernan Ch. 2

What are the main features of a loan contract?

- The riskier the borrow the higher the interest rate charged.  
- The interest rate charged, is lower with longer maturities.  
- In the area where the bank operates, what interest rate banks usually charge?  
- In which kind of market does the bank operate?
  - Monopoly, Oligopoly, Perfect Competition..

---

What is the optimal size of the bank?

- Is it better to have universal banks or specialized banks?

>For example there are banks that specialize in mortgages, and specialize in real estate  
>Cooperative banks provide loans to the shareholders of the bank

During 2008 crisis govt. intervened because some banks are to large, "too big to fail" because the consequences of those banks failing are worse then injecting money into them to prevent them from failing.

This led to criticism: banks should not be allowed to become "too big to fail", because this leads banks to commit moral hazard, to basically risk more then they should.

- What is the optimal degree of competition in banking?
- What regulation of banks?

---

Banks are defined as financial intermediaries that buy securities (loans) and sell securities of another type (deposits). This process of asset transformation depends on technology and competition.

Let's start defining the cost function of bank.

>Cost function: relation between change in output and change in costs

*Assume that the bank has only loans and deposits, all the banks have the same cost function*

$C(D;L)$

Let's say we have five different cost functions

$\log{C_i} = C_0 + \epsilon_i \log{Q_i} + a_i \log{w}$ INCOMPLETE

In this approach, the same number of accounts, depend on different costs.

In the modern approach inside the cost function we have to include risk management and information processing.

---

### The Behavior of Individual Banks in a Competitive Banking Sector

Rochet P.95

Banks are price takers, hence: $r_D = r_L$ interest rate of loans = interest rate of deposits

|Assets|Liabilities|
|---|---|
|$R_n = C_n + M_n (\text{Reserves})\\ L_n (\text{Loans})$|$D_n  \\ (\text{Deposits})$|

$M_n$ is the bank's net position in the interbank market  

$C_n = \alpha D_n$  

$\alpha$ is the of compulsory reserves may be used as a policy instrument
through which the Central Bank tries to influence the quantity of money in circulation in the economy.

---

$$
\begin{cases}
\max{\Pi}_{D,L}\\


r_L + rM - R_DD - C(D; L) \\
:
\begin{cases}
M = D - L  -\alpha D
\end{cases}
\end{cases}
$$

>Build a lagriangian, and solve for $(L, D)  = 0$ 

---

$ \max{\Pi}_{D,L}  = r_L + rM - R_DD - C(D; L)$  

If $r_D$ increases, $\frac{\partial C}{\partial D}$ has to decrease. The banks takes less deposits.

If $r_L$ increases, $\frac{\partial C}{\partial L}$ has to decrease. The banks provides more loans.

---

If we specify a cost function: 

$C(D,L) = \gamma_DD + \gamma_LL$

---

The cross-effect (second derivative)

$$\frac{\partial^2C}{\partial D \partial L}$$
Economies of scope

when $\frac{\partial^2C}{\partial D \partial L} >0$
an increase in $r_L$ entails a decrease (resp. an increase) in $D$, and an increase in $r_D$ entails an increase (resp. a decrease) in $L$.

when $\frac{\partial^2C}{\partial D \partial L} = 0$
cross-effects are null.

when $\frac{\partial^2C}{\partial D \partial L} < 0$
an increase in L has the consequence of decreasing the marginal cost of deposits.
This is a particular form of economies of scope because it implies that a universal
bank that jointly offers loans and deposits is more efficient than two separate entities,
specialized, respectively, on loans and deposits.

---

Three equations, three unknowns $r_L, r_D, r$


1. $I(r_L) = \sum_{n=1}^{N} L_n(r_L, r_D, r)$ - loans market
2. $S(r_D) = B + \sum_{n=1}^{N} D_n(r_L, r_D, r)$  - savings market
3. $\sum_{n=1}^{N} L_n(r_L, r_D, r) = (1 - a) \sum_{n=1}^{N} D_n(r_L, r_D, r)$  - interbank market

Solution:

$r_L = r + \gamma_L$   
$r_D = r(1 - a) - \gamma_D;$

---

### The Monti-Klein Model of Monopolistic Bank

Monopoly $\neq$ Monopolistic!

Monopolistic = when goods in a market are not perfect substitutes

Different banks offer different products.

---

Monopolistic competition features:

Now $L$ depends on $r_L$ (monopolistic competition curve) and is hence no more constant.

> Same for deposits, $D$ depends on $r_D$

$\pi = \pi(L, D) = (r_L(L) - r)L + (r(1 - a) - r_D(D))D - C(D, L)$

---

To maximize profit of the banks $\pi(L, D)$:

$$
\begin{cases}
\max{\Pi}_{L,D}  \\

(r_L(L) - r)L + (r(1 - a) - r_D(D))D - C(D, L)

\end{cases}
$$

>Lagrange multiplier Equation with 1 constraint  
>$L(x,y,λ) = f(x,y) - λg(x, y)$  

$$\pi(C(D,L), λ) =\\
-C(D,L)+\\
\lambda[(r_L(L) - r)L + (r(1 - a) - r_D(D))D]
$$

$\frac{\partial \pi}{\partial D}= C'_D(D, L) - \lambda =0$

$\frac{\partial \pi}{\partial L}= C'_L(D, L) - \lambda =0$

$\frac{\partial \pi}{\partial L} = \frac{\partial \pi}{\partial D} = 0$

Marginal revenue = Marginal cost = 0

First order condition: $\frac{\partial \pi}{\partial (D, L)}= 0$

$\frac{\partial \pi}{\partial L}= r_L'(L)L + r_L - r - C'_L(D,L) = 0 $

$\frac{\partial \pi}{\partial D}= -r_D'(D)D + r(1-\alpha) - r_D - C'_D(D,L) = 0 $

---

>Price elasticity
>$\epsilon = \frac{\text{change in quantity}}{\text{change in price}}$

$$\epsilon_L = -\frac{r_LL'(L)}{L(r_L)} > 0, 
\epsilon_D = \frac{r_DD'(D)}{D(r_D)} > 0$$

Elasticity > 0 meaning not completely inelastic.

---


> [Lerner Index](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lerner_index)  
> $L = \frac{P - MC}{P} = -\frac{1}{\epsilon}$  
> ((Price minus marginal cost) divided by price) and its equal to inverse elasticities.  
> Is a measure of a firm's market power.  
> Lerner index in a perfect competitive market is 0.  
> In a monopoly its 1.

$$\frac{r_L^\star-(r+C_L')}{r^\star_L} = \frac{1}{\epsilon_L(r^\star_L)},
\\ \space \\
\frac{r(1-\alpha)+C_D'-r_D^\star}{r^\star_D} =  \frac{1}{\epsilon_D(r^\star_D)}
$$

>Revise (Microeconomics)  
>What are the conditions of price elasticities in monopolistic markets, monopolies.  
>The answer is inelastic!