
[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-25

After the 1930s the banks were highly regulated: all the banks were allowed to do was to take deposits and issue loans, nothing else.

After the 80s, a wave of deregulation started.

Cheap and stable source of funding: banks removed deposit-rate ceilings, so now they could accept any number of deposits at higher costs.

Money Market Mutual Funds - MMMFs  
Funds that offer very mutual funds

On the asset side, substitutes for bank loans arose and took market share away from banks. 

The junk bond market grew from 10 billion in the early 1980s to over 299 billion by the end of the decade.

The competitor with short-term bank loans is commercial paper (CP).

---

In a Cournout Oligolopoly model, the firm decides on Quantity.

In a Bertrand Oligopoly model, the firm decides on Price.

---

What is the optimal number of banks?

Banks are symmetric located

Each new branch has a setup cost.

Less banks, more transportation costs to reach the bank.

Minimize this cost function  
$nF + \frac{tD}{4n}$  
respect to $n$ number of banks

$n^\star = \frac{1}{2} \sqrt{\frac{tD}{F}}$

In a free market economy, since the banks don't consider transportation costs, there are more branches than necessary.

---

### Measures of concentration  

Concentration index

Measures concentration of all banks

---

The k Bank concentration ratio

Market share of the first 5 banks
If there is no concentration, each bank have more or less same total assets

---

Herfindak-Hirscman Index (HHI)

in the case of monopoly = 1  
in perfect competition 1/n

---



