
[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-26

Market structure (which is measured through concentration ratios) affects perfomance.

Structure-Conduct-Performance paradigm (SCP) 

Conduct = Interest rate charged
Conduct affects performance.

Market performance (endogenous) is determined by market structure (exogenous).

Thr higher the concentration of banks, the higher the possibility for collusion.

This theory was challenged in the 70s, by the efficient market hypothesis.

If a bank achieves a higher degree of efficiencies than other banks; the most efficient banks get to the top in terms of concentration.

Market structure is endogenous and is determined by the most efficient banks, who determine the interest rate that will be charged.

Free entry into the market is relevant, if this is not the case, this model doesn't apply properly.

Efficient market hypothesis: market structure is shaped endogenously, in the end will only remain the most efficient banks. 

Market share of the most efficient banks.

S-P paradigm for the market efficient hypothesis.

---

Panzar and Rosse Approach

If the cost of inputs for the bank increases, the banks increases interest rate.

The Panzar-Ross statistic  

>The Panzar-Rosse H-statistic is a measure used in economics to assess the degree of competition in a market, particularly in the context of the structure-conduct-performance paradigm.

$H = \sum^m_k=(\frac{\partial R^\star_i}{\partial w_{k_i}})(w_{k_i}/R^\star)$

Ranges between -inf and 1

Between 0 and 1 we are in monopolistic competition.

This is the most used statistic to estimated market power today.

In the long run:  
marginal revenue = marginal cost  
total revenue = total cost  

---

### Optimal loan contracts

A complete contingent contract would have to specify every possible causality.

Usual features:

1. Amount of loan (repayment)
2. Interest rate
3. Collateral possible adjustments
4. Action (investment decisions) to be undertaken by the borrower

---

Lets distinguish symmetric and asymmetric information situation.

Assume only lender, only one borrower.
Only one good and two dates: $t_0, t_1$

The good will produce $\widetilde{y}$ which is a random variable.

Both can check the result of  $\widetilde{y}$.

The contract specifies how the outcome  $\widetilde{y}$ is split: $R(y)$ is the split between the borrow and the lender.

The bank's fixes the interest rate to maximizes the utility of the borrower such that the expected utility of the lender can be on a certain level.

Here we to have apply the lagrangian.

First and second order condition.

Basically, the contract depends on the risk aversions of borrower and lenders.

In general, banks can diversify and have more money and information, so they are less risk averse then borrowers.

$R'(y)$ is the sensitivity of price change, its higher the higher the risk aversion of the borrower and lender.

The interest rate of the bank depends on the amount realized by the borrower: the output!

In a symmetric information model the information should depend on the output of the project. If the project will succeed more, the bank will get more interest, the amount of interest should not be fixed.

In reality the contract offered by the banks is a fixed interest rate and it doesn't depend on project outcome but on the condition of financial markets.

There is no risk sharing in asymmetric information.

---

A contract can be described as a function:

- a repayment function $\widetilde{y} \rightarrow R(\widetilde{y})$

- a auditing rule $\mathcal{A}$ of reports of the borrower for which the lender undertakes an audit

- a penalty\reward function $P(y,\widetilde{y})$ depending on the result of the audit

---

$R(y) = \min(y,R)$  
The efficient incompatible hypothesis states that the bank doesn't monitor to minimize costs.

---

Moral hazard is that the borrower doesn't make an effort to carry the project successful.

Expected utility of the borrower must be higher when he makes an effort then when it doesn't.

The highest expected revenue is obtained when an effort is made.

For the bank to void moral hazard, must be getting 0 interest.

---

Tradeoff between collateral and interest rate.



