
[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-30

Under asymmetry of information supply and demand does not work in the context of the credit market.

[Credit Rationing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_rationing)

>We define credit rationing all the cases in which a supplier (bank) decides to not fulfill all demand  for loans, even when the extra borrowers they are willing to pay the corresponding higher interest rate.

Keeton (1979)

- Type I Credit rationing
   - All the borrowers get less then they require.
- Type II Credit rationing
   - Some randomly selected borrowers among a homogenous group will be turned down and will not be given a loan.

In the second case some borrowers are totally excluded from the credit market.  This phenomenon is known as red-lining and occurs because do not have enough future cash-flows or collateral  to match their demand for credit.

Why do we have credit rationing?

The Backward-Bending Supply of Credit
Equilibrium credit rationing can appear as soon as the expected return on a bank loan (for a given category of borrowers) is not a monotonic function of the nominal rate of this loan.

Under credit rationing supply is always below demand.

After $r^\star$ equilibrium interest rate, the bank is not willing to rise further interest rate, or it would attract riskier borrowers.

$r^\star$ maximizes expected return of the bank despite the mismatch between supply and demand.

In a competitive equilibrium the banks expected rate of return $r$  equals the cost of financing (zero-profit condition), we can also have credit rationing.

---

*Compulsory (for the exam)* research project, each group will be given a different topics, the objective would be to collect references from the web, and create a presentation about the given argument in key points.

Tomorrow professor's will give out topics and define a number of groups, we would have to form groups.

Everyone will present *invidividually*, even if this is a project group  (?)

Each student will be marked individually on the last day of lectures.
Deadline would be right before end of lectures.

One topic would for sure be climate change.

---

The basic assumption of Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) is that borrowers differ by a risk parameter $\theta$, which is privately observed.

Profit function (maximization) of the firm.

$\pi(y) = max(0,y-R)$

In the case of a collateral C is introduced.

$\pi(y) = max(-C,y-R)$

---

Expected profit of the bank

$E(\pi(y)|\theta)$

For a given $\theta$ the profit of the bank will be higher but the number of applicants with less interest rate decreases.

Collaterals are a sorting device.

