[Back](00.md)

## 2023-09-25

Financial Transactions without risk do not exist.

All transactions carry **Financial Risk**.

1. How financial risk is defined and measured?

2. How an investor's attitude towards risk is to be conceptualized and then measured?

3. How investor's risk attitude interact with the subjective uncertainties associated with the available assets to determine an investors desired portfolio holdings?

-> How investors construct their portfolio?

---

Risk of an Investment: uncertainty in the future cash-flow stream. 

The cashflow is modeled as a **random variable**.

### Example:

State of nature = $\pi_{1}$ = $\pi_{2}$
(Equally likely)

| Investment | cost at t=0 | cost at t=1 $\theta_{1}$ | cost at t=1 $\theta_{2}$|
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| I1 | 1000 | 1050 | 1200 |
| I2 | 1000 | 500 | 1600 |
| **I3** | **1000** | **1050** | **1600** |

All rational individuals (*non-satiated*) will choose Investment 3, as it has **State-by-State Dominance**.

Which induces an incomplete ranking.

Let us consider only I1 and I2

Investment 2 is more **dispersed** than investment 1.

Financial risk is strictly connected to dispersion.

Investment 3 is more risky than Investment 1, it has a upside risk (risk of making more money).

---

The same table, but with ROI;
Which is the best investment? It depends on individual preferences! (If we exclude I3)

| Inv. | cost at t=1 $\theta_{1}$ | cost at t=1 $\theta_{2}$| Variance $\sigma$|  E[x] |
| --- |  --- | --- | --- | --- |
| I1 | 5% | 20% | 0.075 | 12.5% |
| I2 | -50% | 60% | 0.55 | 5% |
| **I3** | **5** | **60%** | 0.275 | 32.5% |

We measure dispersion with variance.

### Mean-Variance criteria

1. For investments of the same E[x], choose the one with lowest $\sigma$

1. For investments of the same $\sigma$, choose the one with greatest $\sigma$

Mean-Variance induces an incomplete ranking.
**(In this case its because there are no investments with the same E[x] or Variance)**




























