[Back](00.md)

## 2023-09-26

In this case we can't use

- State-by-State Dominance
- Mean Variance Criteria

(Typical Situation in Financial Markets)

| Inv. |  $\theta_{1}$ | $\theta_{2}$| Variance $\sigma$|  E[x] |
| --- |  --- | --- | --- | --- |
| I4 | 3% | 5% | 0.01 | 4% |
| I5 | 2% | 8% | 0.3 | 5% |

- $E[x_5]$ is 1.25 greater than $E[x_4]$  
- I4 is 3 times riskier than I4

---

Let's represent individual choices in a situation *without* risk.

### Choice Theory under Certainty

| Preference Relation | Symbol |
|---|---|
|Weak preferences | $\succeq$ |
|Strong Preference| $\succ$ |
|Indifference | $\sim$ |

Main assumptions:  

- $A_1$: Every investor possess a **complete** preference relation
- $A_2$: The preference relation is **transitive**
- $A_3$: The preference relation is **continuous**

#### Von Neumann-Morgenstern Theorem

$a\succeq b$ if $u(a) \geq u(b)$

a is preferred over b if the utility of a is $\geq$ than the utility of b

>Complete, transitive, and continuous preferences over
probability distributions of outcomes that satisfy the “independence axiom” can be represented
by the maximization of “expected utility” (just as complete, transitive, and continuous
preferences over certain outcomes can be represented by the maximization of standard utility).

---

### Choice Theory under Uncertainty

The objects of choice are typically vectors of contingent money payoff

Each vector here is an asset in which is possible to invest.

$\vec{x} = (10,5,7,8)$  
$\vec{y} = (6,7,8,4)$

Each $\omega$ is a state of nature.  
A state of nature is just a possible outcome with its probability of happening.

|$\vec{x}$|Probability|
|---|---|
|10|Prob[$\omega_1$]|
|5|Prob[$\omega_2$]|
|7|Prob[$\omega_3$]|
|8|Prob[$\omega_4$]|

---

The investment has a cost of 100$

| Inv. |  $\theta_{1}$ | $\theta_{2}$|
| --- |  --- | --- |
| Royal Dutch | 100 | 150 |
| IBM | 90 | 160 |

If  $\theta_{1}$ is more likely, Royal Dutch is the best option, if $\theta_{2}$ is, IBM.

---

Let's consider this scenario.

| Inv. |  $\theta_{1}$ | $\theta_{2}$|
| --- |  --- | --- |
| Royal Dutch | 100 | 150 |
| IBM | 90 | 200 |

In this case investors might be tempted to choose IBM.

---

Let's consider this scenario.

| Inv. |  $\theta_{1}$ | $\theta_{2}$|
| --- |  --- | --- |
| Royal Dutch | 100 | 150 |
| IBM | 90 | 160 |
| Sony | 90 | 150 |

Sony is dominated by State-by-State by the other two options.

$\theta_{1}$  is bad.  
$\theta_{2}$  is good.  

The utility of money has diminishing marginal returns. For this reasons most investors would choose Royal Dutch so that they don't loose money.

