[Back](../00.md)

## 2023-10-24

Let us consider now the expectations:

$e_p$ = expected rate of return of the portfolio  
$e_p =  e_2 + \omega(e_1 - e_2)$

$\omega = \frac{e_p-e_2}{e_1-e_2}$

$\sigma_p^2 = a\omega^2 + b\omega + c =$

$$= a (\frac{e_p - e_2}{e_1 - e_2})^2 + b(\frac{e_p - e_2}{e_1 - e_2}) + c =$$
$$= \frac{a}{(e_p-e_2)^2}e_p^2 + (\frac{b}{e_1-e_2} - \frac{2ae_2}{(e_1-e_2)^2})e_p + \frac{ae_2^2}{(e_1-e_2)^2} - \frac{be_2}{e_1-e_2}+c$$

One again, this is a parabola (considering $e_p$), and since we already established $a$ is always positive, the parabola is concave up!

In finance however the parabola is often rotate on the graph: 

- $e_p$ is on the y axis
- $\sigma_p^2$ is on the x axis

The vertex of the parabola is the $\text{mpv}$: minimum variance portfolio

Any rational investor will never buy any portfolio below the $\text{mpv}$, since its inefficient.

Only the upper part of the parabola will have efficient portfolio.

Portfolio choices are dependent on individual preferences.

On indifference curves the total utility remains constant.

The choice between will made with the intersection between the highest indifference curve and the set of efficient portfolios curve.

---

Let us consider $\sigma$ as a measure of risk

$\sigma_p = [\omega^2 \sigma_1^2 + (1-\omega)^2\sigma_2^2 + 2\omega(1-\omega)\rho_{1,2}\sigma_1,\sigma_2]$ *it's an hyperbola!*

---

For $\rho_{1,2} = 1$

$\sigma_p = [(\omega \sigma_1 + (1-\omega)\sigma_2)^2]^\frac{1}{2}; \sqrt{x^2} = |x|$

$\sigma_p = |\omega \sigma_1 + (1-\omega)\sigma_2| = |\omega(\sigma_1-\sigma_2)+\sigma_2| = $

$$=
\begin{cases}
\omega(\sigma_1-\sigma_2)+\sigma_2 \rightarrow \omega(\sigma_1-\sigma_2)+\sigma_2 > 0, \omega > \frac{-\sigma_2}{\sigma_1 - \sigma_2} \\
\omega(-\sigma_1-\sigma_2)-\sigma_2 \rightarrow \omega(\sigma_1-\sigma_2)+\sigma_2 < 0, \omega < \frac{-\sigma_2}{\sigma_1 - \sigma_2} 
\end{cases}
$$

The hyperbola collapses, the result is two linear functions.  
$\omega^\star < 0$, the solution is a portfolio with no risk where we can short on asset 1.

---

For $\rho_{1,2} = -1$

$\sigma_p = [(\omega \sigma_1 - (1-\omega)\sigma_2)^2]^\frac{1}{2}; \sqrt{x^2} = |x|$

$\sigma_p = |\omega \sigma_1 - (1-\omega)\sigma_2| = |\omega(\sigma_1+\sigma_2)-\sigma_2| = $

$$=
\begin{cases}
\omega(\sigma_1+\sigma_2)-\sigma_2 \rightarrow \omega(\sigma_1+\sigma_2)-\sigma_2 > 0, \omega > \frac{\sigma_2}{\sigma_1 - \sigma_2} \\
\omega(\sigma_1+\sigma_2)-\sigma_2 \rightarrow \omega(\sigma_1+\sigma_2)-\sigma_2 < 0, \omega < \frac{\sigma_2}{\sigma_1 - \sigma_2}
\end{cases}
$$

The hyperbola collapses, the result is two linear functions.  
$\omega^\star > 0$

---

In the plane $(e, \sigma)$

$$\sigma_p =
\begin{cases}
\frac{a}{(e_p-e_2)^2}e_p^2 + (\frac{b}{e_1-e_2} - \frac{2ae_2}{(e_1-e_2)^2})e_p + \frac{ae_2^2}{(e_1-e_2)^2} - \frac{be_2}{e_1-e_2}+c 
\end{cases}^\frac{1}{2}
$$
*... is an hyperbola!* (We added $^\frac{1}{2}$)

---

The reason why we use standard deviation as a measure of risk (instead of variance) is because in the market there is in general also a risk-free opportunity, in the market it is always possible to invest in a risk opportunity.


> **Recall**  
> $\sigma^2 = \text{variance}$  
> $\sigma = \text{standard deviation}$

---

Let us consider two assets: one risk-free asset and one risky asset.  

Asset 1 is characterized by: $\widetilde{r}, e_1, \sigma_1^2$  
Asset 2 is the risk free asset: $\widetilde{r_f}, E[r_f] = r_f, 0$




$e_p = \omega e_1 + (1-\omega) r_f = \omega (e_1 - r_f)+r_f$  

Considering the standard deviation as a function of $\omega$  
$\sigma_p^2 =  \omega_2\sigma^2_1 + \text{variance} + \text{covariance}$  
$\sigma_p^2 = \omega_2\sigma^2_1 + 0 + 0$

$\sigma_p^2 = \omega \sigma_1^2; \sigma_p = |\omega \sigma_1|$


$\omega = \frac{e_p-r_f}{e_1-r_f}; \sigma_p = |\frac{e_p-r_f}{e_1-r_f}\sigma_1|  = $

$$= \begin{cases}
\frac{e_p-r_f}{e_1-r_f}\sigma_1, \rightarrow e_p > r_f\\
-\frac{e_p-r_f}{e_1-r_f}\sigma_1, \rightarrow e_p < r_f
\end{cases}
=
$$

This is why we are using standard deviation $\sigma^2$ instead of $\sigma$ variance, the mathematics becomes simple, as this is just a combination of two linear functions.

$$= \begin{cases}
r_f + \frac{e_1-r_f}{\sigma_1}\sigma_p \rightarrow e_p > r_f \\
r_f - \frac{e_1-r_f}{\sigma_1}\sigma_p \rightarrow e_p < r_f
\end{cases}
$$