[Back](00.md)

## 2023-10-23

IRR and NPV are used when projects are mutually exclusive and resources are limited

IRR and NPV can differ when mutually have different sizes or lengths

---

Resources | $IRR$ | $NPV$ |
|---|---|---|
Size | $IRR$ | $PI$ |
Length | $IRR$ | Equivalent annuity |

---

Project A, length 5 years  

- NPV = $442
- IRR = 28.7%

Project B, length 10 years  

- NPV = $478
- IRR = 19.4%

Hurdle rate for both projects = 12%

---

Equivalent annuity (A) = 442 / (A, 12%, 5 years)

$\text{E}_A = \frac{442}{\frac{1}{0.12}- \frac{1}{0.12(1.12)^5}} = 112.62$

Equivalent annuity (B) = 478 / (B, 12%, 10 years)

$\text{EA}_B = \frac{478}{\frac{1}{0.12}- \frac{1}{0.12(1.12)^10}} = 84.6$

---

Costa crociere and it’s CFO are valuing to repair a cruise ship and the cost 
are estimated as follows:

- New engine 250
- New GPS navigation system 200
- Ship Hull repair 160

---

The ship hull repair costs are all deductible from the income of the year 0, while the other investment costs will be depreciated in 5 years.

The operating cost for Costa after the repair are estimated to be 985.

The investment in the  new GPS is not strictly necessary but in this case the operating cost would be 1181 per year.

The book value of the ship is 0 and it can be used for 10 years maximum.

---

The alternative is to buy a new ship. In this case the life span would be 15 years and the depreciation would last 10 years.

The investment would be 2000 but the estimated market value of the old ship would be 140. 

The operating costs for this option would be 900.

---

Choose the best alternative given a 40% tax rate and a 10% cost of capital.

---
